A semantic search system might return three internal docs: one about OAuth, one about token storage, and one about login flows. You’d need to read through them to piece together the answer.\n   A RAG system would retrieve the same documents, extract the relevant sections, and then generate a direct, cohesive answer like: _‘Your system uses OAuth 2.0 for authentication, stores access tokens in encrypted Redis, and handles login through a custom API gateway.’_\n\nWhat is the difference between RAG and fine-tuning?\n\nThe main difference between RAG and fine-tuning is that RAG allows the AI model to reach out to a knowledge base at query time. It does not change the model weights, just the knowledge it has access to. [...] Multi-hop RAG: This is designed for questions that require several steps to answer. It retrieves documents step-by-step, with each step refining the next. This is useful in academic research tools. For instance, it could answer, ‘What is the growth rate of the largest logistics company in the US?’ by first identifying the company and then retrieving financial data to calculate its growth. [...] Naive RAG: The most basic form of RAG. It chooses the top search results (often using simple keyword matching) and feeds them straight to the language model. There is no reranking, filtering, or understanding of context. It works for straightforward questions but struggles with complex ones. It is quick to build but not very smart.\n   Advanced RAG: It can use vector search, reranking, query rewriting, or feedback loops to get better results. It is built to be smarter, faster, and more accurate. You can use custom tools, keep a memory of past chats, and even check if the answer is correct. A good example of an advanced RAG is a customer support tool.\n\nWhat are the components of a RAG system?\n\nIf you are wondering how to build a RAG system, it helps to first understand its key parts.Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) from basics to advanced", "url": "https://medium.com/@tejpal.abhyuday/retrieval-augmented-generation-rag-from-basics-to-advanced-a2b068fd576c", "content": "The last step of the RAG pipeline is to generate responses back to the user. In this step, the model synthesizes the retrieved information with its pre-trained knowledge to generate coherent and contextually relevant responses. This process involves integrating the insights gleaned from various sources, ensuring accuracy and relevance, and crafting a response that is not only informative but also aligns with the user’s original query, maintaining a natural and conversational tone. [...] 1. Vector Database Creation: RAG starts by converting an internal dataset into vectors and storing them in a vector database (or a database of your choosing).\n2. User Input: A user provides a query in natural language, seeking an answer or completion.\n3. Information Retrieval: The retrieval mechanism scans the vector database to identify segments that are semantically similar to the user’s query (which is also embedded). These segments are then given to the LLM to enrich its context for generating responses.\n4. Combining Data: The chosen data segments from the database are combined with the user’s initial query, creating an expanded prompt.\n5. Generating Text: The enlarged prompt, filled with added context, is then given to the LLM, which crafts the final, context-aware response. [...] With RAG, the LLM is able to leverage knowledge and information that is not necessarily in its weights by providing it access to external knowledge sources such as databases.\n It leverages a retriever to find relevant contexts to condition the LLM, in this way, RAG is able to augment the knowledge-base of an LLM with relevant documents.\n The retriever here could be any of the following depending on the need for semantic retrieval or not:\n Vector database: Typically, queries are embedded using models like BERT for generating dense vector embeddings. Alternatively, traditional methods like TF-IDF can be used for sparse embeddings. The search is then conducted based on term frequency or semantic similarity.`